Hi everyone.
NOTE CONF
Sorry for the delay.
I have a class just before this one, so I.
NOTE CONF
It takes some time to run to this one.
Uh, I, uh, right.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's just a sack.
We're running a minute late.
NOTE CONF
Uh, wanted to show you something, but I can't find
it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Oh, sorry.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Very good.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Sorry for the delay.
Uh, so today we will talk about.
NOTE CONF
We will continue discussing the applications of derivatives.
But before we do that, I would like to remind
NOTE CONF
you that the mid-semester feedback is open.
It will be open until February 14th, I was told.
NOTE CONF
So please, please, please submit your feedback.
It's very valuable to us so that we know you
NOTE CONF
know what works, what doesn't work, what to how to,
you know, make this, uh, like an optimal experience for,
NOTE CONF
for both of us, but, you know, mostly for you.
Uh, so your feedback is very important.
NOTE CONF
Please submit your feedback.
I think it should be a learn.
NOTE CONF
I try to look for the link.
I didn't find it, but I think, uh, I wasn't
NOTE CONF
given Instructions, but I think you probably have.
And if anyone is unsure how to submit your feedback,
NOTE CONF
please let me know and I will ask the people
who do know.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Thank you very much.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Let's, uh, let's, uh, get on with this.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, we continue discussing the, uh, applications of derivatives
today as well.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Oh, God.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
You're right.
NOTE CONF
Come on.
Uh, please work.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Today we will talk about we will continue talking about
NOTE CONF
some of these, uh, in particular, we will explore maxima
and minima and do some interesting limits.
NOTE CONF
Uh, yeah.
So let's start.
NOTE CONF
I'm giving you the question and I will now give
you the the options as well.
NOTE CONF
Let me log in to book club.
But for now obviously you can think about the question.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This worked quickly.
NOTE CONF
No.
Not this.
NOTE CONF
Time.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So hopefully you see the options now, so vote for
the one that you think is the correct one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The voting is a little slow.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
So.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, right.
NOTE CONF
So the voting is still going on, but I think
we are.
NOTE CONF
It's a little slow, so I'll give you one minute
and then we will discuss the question.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's see the results.
Oh, sorry.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
The results.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, interesting.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So the correct answer is was chosen by the majority,
but there were some, uh, there were some, um, votes
NOTE CONF
for, uh, the the others.
So let's discuss the problem.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So what do we have here?
NOTE CONF
What kind of.
So this is clearly an optimisation problem right?
NOTE CONF
So we need to find the maximum.
We're giving the we're given the function and we want
NOTE CONF
to find the maximum value of that function.
But there are some constraints here right.
NOTE CONF
This is not just so x is allowed to take
particular values.
NOTE CONF
It's not allowed to take just any value.
And moreover since this is the revenue function and we're
NOTE CONF
interested in the maximal value of it.
Well, I mean it would be pretty bad if we
NOTE CONF
had negative maximal revenue, right?
That would be terrible.
NOTE CONF
So there are some constraints on this problem, right.
So since x is the number of sold units.
NOTE CONF
Can you please be quiet?
It's hard for me to speak, let alone scream.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so X is the number of units sold, and
therefore it has to be non-negative, right?
NOTE CONF
You can't sell negative units.
Uh, also the the revenue has to be non-negative.
NOTE CONF
As I said, we don't want a negative revenue.
So we have two inequalities here.
NOTE CONF
We have two constraints here.
X is non-negative and this thing is non-negative right.
NOTE CONF
So solving this.
This part.
NOTE CONF
900 -60 times x to the power one over three
gives you that x has to be less than this
NOTE CONF
number 3375.
I'll just, uh.
NOTE CONF
Quickly.
Uh, quickly, uh, show you.
NOTE CONF
I mean, it's I'm pretty sure you can do it,
but just to, you know.
NOTE CONF
So we need, uh, 900 -60.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Um, so that is what, am I, right?
Uh, yeah, I am.
NOTE CONF
And then, uh, from here, you obtain that X has
to be less than or equal to this number.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So, um, so what did we find?
We found that we have an optimisation problem on a
NOTE CONF
closed bounded interval, which is good because we can use
one of my favourite theorems extreme value theorem.
NOTE CONF
So when you have a function that is continuous and
this is a continuous function on a closed bounded interval.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so in this case it's the interval from 0
to 3 3375.
NOTE CONF
Then to find its absolute maximum you have to do
two things.
NOTE CONF
You have to find the critical points which I think
I assume that's what you did and how you got
NOTE CONF
the answer.
But also don't forget to see what happens at critical
NOTE CONF
points.
Sorry at the end points of the interval.
NOTE CONF
So at the point zero and 3375 right.
So this is what we do.
NOTE CONF
Luckily at the end points we have zero.
So therefore uh we the maximum will be found among
NOTE CONF
the critical points.
And when we set the derivative equal to zero, we
NOTE CONF
get x equals 1000.
As the only critical point right.
NOTE CONF
And then we evaluate the function at that point to
get 3000.
NOTE CONF
Let me just perhaps.
So the function is 900 -60 x over three.
NOTE CONF
Now.
So so we have to set that equal to.
NOTE CONF
Zero.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Take the derivative and set that equal to zero.
So what's the derivative there?
NOTE CONF
Uh.
But, uh, there's something I don't like about this.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Oh, that's not the right function.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, this doesn't make any sense.
This is the function.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So how to take the derivative 900 times two over
NOTE CONF
3X2 over three minus one star equals zero.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So 600.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So.
It goes.
NOTE CONF
Ten.
And that gives you a uh that gives you x
NOTE CONF
equals 1000.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let me zoom out.
So right there.
NOTE CONF
There you go.
And then this is the value that you plug into
NOTE CONF
the original function.
And you find three 30,000 is the maximum revenue.
NOTE CONF
Are there any questions.
Uh right.
NOTE CONF
So if there are no questions let's move on to
another optimisation problem which will be slightly different.
NOTE CONF
Oh right.
So I also sketched the graph for you and forgot
NOTE CONF
about it.
But I didn't.
NOTE CONF
But I included it here.
So this is what the graph of this function revenue
NOTE CONF
function looks like.
And you can convince yourself that indeed uh, at the
NOTE CONF
point 1000 you get the global maximum.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Question number two Find the two positive numbers whose product
is 750, and for which the sum of one and
NOTE CONF
ten times the other is a minimum.
So I'll find it for you now.
NOTE CONF
And I will display it on up.
There.
NOTE CONF
Look at the results.
Good.
NOTE CONF
And that is indeed the correct answer.
But I would like you to think about how this
NOTE CONF
optimisation problem is different from the previous one.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So when we approach the solution, I think probably you
denoted the numbers by x and 750 divided by x
NOTE CONF
and then you are.
So you uh wrote down this function which you have
NOTE CONF
to minimise.
However, you know this time we have no constraints on
NOTE CONF
X except that it's positive, but it's not uh, it's
not on a bounded interval.
NOTE CONF
So this is an an optimisation problem on an unbounded
interval, because x can take B any number between zero
NOTE CONF
and infinity.
Um, so uh, so we cannot use the extreme value
NOTE CONF
theorem because that one required a closed bounded interval.
So what do we do?
NOTE CONF
Well, uh, we can just investigate the behaviour of this
function, uh, using the derivative.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Um, so first we find the critical points, and it
NOTE CONF
turns out it only has one critical point on the
entire, um, sorry, positive real line.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so how do we know what kind of critical
point this is?
NOTE CONF
Is this a how do we know the nature of
this critical point?
NOTE CONF
How did you determine that?
How did you know this was the minimum?
NOTE CONF
Yes, please.
Uh, that's a good.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, that's that's a good strategy as well.
But there is also something else you can do.
NOTE CONF
When you find a critical point.
How do you determine the nature of it?
NOTE CONF
Yes, please.
Second derivative.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Very good.
NOTE CONF
Indeed.
You can do exactly.
NOTE CONF
Those two will work.
So you can sketch and investigate the the function.
NOTE CONF
But you can also do the second derivative.
So computing the second derivative gives you the following number.
NOTE CONF
And since x is positive you know x can only
take positive values.
NOTE CONF
This will be positive.
That means that in particular it will be positive at
NOTE CONF
the point that you found.
So you have found yourself a local minimum, right.
NOTE CONF
And uh, so again the second derivative is positive everywhere
on the interval of interest.
NOTE CONF
And we conclude that the graph of the function is
concave up right.
NOTE CONF
So this is the absolute minimum.
So not only is it the local minimum because the
NOTE CONF
second derivative test gives you a local information.
But since you know you know that this second derivative
NOTE CONF
is positive everywhere.
So you know that the graph of the function is
NOTE CONF
concave up like this.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
And therefore the point that you found is absolute minimum,
not just the local minimum.
NOTE CONF
Alternatively, as you suggested, we can do something like this.
Uh, we can uh, find the first derivative and it
NOTE CONF
gives us the following expression.
And then we can look at the signs of it.
NOTE CONF
And that will tell us about the behaviour of the
function where it's increasing, where it's decreasing.
NOTE CONF
And uh, so um, since it's positive on this interval
zero and then negative, uh, here we see that it
NOTE CONF
is.
So the function starts decreasing.
NOTE CONF
Decreasing reaches this point 50 times square root of three
and then starts increasing.
NOTE CONF
So it is a it is the absolute minimum.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Very good.
Now the next question.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so let's try to.
Solve this together.
NOTE CONF
Let's first look at the results.
Yeah, the results are good.
NOTE CONF
And that's indeed the correct answer.
So, Uh, let's see how we can.
NOTE CONF
Solve this one together.
So, uh, I want you to pay attention to some
NOTE CONF
things.
So first of all, that, uh, what is, uh.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so we have the limit as x goes to
pi over two from the left of ten x.
NOTE CONF
To the power of cosine x.
So notice that, uh, when pi of.
NOTE CONF
So when x goes to pi over two from the
left.
NOTE CONF
This is positive because ten x is sine x over
cosine x.
NOTE CONF
And as long as these two stay in the first
quadrant this is non negative.
NOTE CONF
So this is a Positive.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So is cosine x.
Uh, but.
NOTE CONF
Um, as, uh, as you approach pi over pi over
two, this becomes, this goes to.
NOTE CONF
Zero.
So the whole thing approaches infinity.
NOTE CONF
So this is kind of limit of this kind.
Here because uh ten goes to infinity because the the
NOTE CONF
cosine goes to zero.
So you get a limit of this kind.
NOTE CONF
And this is the so-called one of the so-called indeterminate
forms.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so in your book, uh, you have a recipe
of how to deal with indeterminate forms of this kind.
NOTE CONF
You consider the logarithm of this expression, right?
And that's where it's important that you are.
NOTE CONF
The expression is positive, uh, so that you can, uh.
Uh, you can take a logarithm.
NOTE CONF
So consider.
Uh, ln of ten x cos x.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So if you take the limit of this thing.
NOTE CONF
You can use properties of the logarithm to say that
it's the same as.
NOTE CONF
Right?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so now, uh, as I said.
So this goes to infinity.
NOTE CONF
So this will go to infinity.
This will go to zero.
NOTE CONF
So you have a limit of the kind zero times
infinity.
NOTE CONF
And to transform this into something that you know how
to deal with.
NOTE CONF
You can write it in this form.
Ellen Tan x divided by one divided by cosine x.
NOTE CONF
So now you have infinity over infinity which you know
how to deal with because you know lupita's rule.
NOTE CONF
So let me just write it out here.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Then this is the same.
So this is a one sided limit.
NOTE CONF
L'Hopital's rule works for a one sided limits as well.
Provided everything is, uh, nice enough and these functions are
NOTE CONF
indeed, uh, do indeed satisfy the assumption of the assumptions
of the rule.
NOTE CONF
So, uh.
So I'm taking the derivative.
NOTE CONF
Uh uh uh.
Minus.
NOTE CONF
Uh, minus.
Minus.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So these minuses cancel.
NOTE CONF
And what do I get?
I get one over ten x.
NOTE CONF
Unless I made a mistake.
I hope I didn't.
NOTE CONF
Uh, what is that?
Cosine x sine x squared.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
That looks.
NOTE CONF
That looks right.
That looks okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, and this limit is zero, right?
But I'm not done because this is the limit.
NOTE CONF
The limit of the logarithm.
Right.
NOTE CONF
And to find the limit of the original expression, I
need to raise e then limit of.
NOTE CONF
Equals e to the power zero and equals one.
And I am using an important result here.
NOTE CONF
So.
Uh, we calculated the limit.
NOTE CONF
It turned out to be zero.
And hence, by CRM 2.9, which is the composite function
NOTE CONF
theorem.
I have it here for, you know, here.
NOTE CONF
So this is the theorem in your book.
So by this theorem then I obtain that the limit
NOTE CONF
of the original expression is e to the power zero
and is equal to one.
NOTE CONF
Are there any questions about this.
So you may notice that I you know, I'm not
NOTE CONF
just doing the computations, but I'm also reminding you of
the theoretical results that I'm using because it's very important.
NOTE CONF
Right.
We are we are at the this is university City
NOTE CONF
level mathematics.
So we need to be able to justify all the
NOTE CONF
computations and all the statements and all the claims that
we make.
NOTE CONF
Therefore, always make sure that your computations are backed by
theoretical justifications.
NOTE CONF
For example, this composite function theorem.
Are there any questions?
NOTE CONF
I think we can do one more question.
Maybe.
NOTE CONF
Hopefully if it's short, I don't know.
Let me see.
NOTE CONF
Oh it's not short.
But um, let's try this.
NOTE CONF
I'll give you I'll give you two minutes for this
question and I will also.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's see the results.
NOTE CONF
The results are.
It's true.
NOTE CONF
And that's indeed the correct answer.
And that's.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
So what you do is when you deal with a
NOTE CONF
limit like this, you get rid of the.
So so you try to obtain some kind of, um,
NOTE CONF
uh, so some kind of constants in the numerator and
denominator denominator.
NOTE CONF
And uh, so if you perform these operations, you will
see that you will get a very quickly.
NOTE CONF
Let me do the docker.
So.
NOTE CONF
I started writing something for you already.
So once you multiply everything by this number, you get
NOTE CONF
something, you get this expression, and then you get three
to.
NOTE CONF
The two here or two.
And so what you obtain is that these guys go
NOTE CONF
to zero.
And you, you are left with minus one over two.
NOTE CONF
As t goes to infinity.
This is a negative power.
NOTE CONF
It goes to zero.
This goes to zero.
NOTE CONF
So you can apply the quotient rule because these limits
exist and you get minus one over two.
NOTE CONF
Okay, that's.
That was all for today.
NOTE CONF